[DOC-18] Doc for pg_stat_progress_create_index (#16007)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/query-1-performance/pg-stat-progress-create-index.md

title: View CREATE INDEX status with pg_stat_progress_create_index
linkTitle: View CREATE INDEX status
description: Use pg_stat_progress_create_index to get the CREATE INDEX command status, including the status of an ongoing concurrent index backfill, and the index build's progress reports.
headerTitle: View CREATE INDEX status with pg_stat_progress_create_index
image: /images/section_icons/index/develop.png
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: pg-stat-progress-create-index
    parent: query-tuning
    weight: 450
type: docs
---

You can add a new index to an existing table using the YSQL [CREATE INDEX](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#semantics) statement. YugabyteDB supports [online index backfill](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/master/architecture/design/online-index-backfill.md), which is enabled by default. Using this feature, you can build indexes on non-empty tables online, without failing other concurrent writes. YugabyteDB also supports the [CREATE INDEX NONCONCURRENTLY](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#nonconcurrently) statement to disable online index backfill.

### pg_stat_progress_create_index

> YugabyteDB supports the PostgreSQL `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view to report the progress of the CREATE INDEX command execution. Whenever CREATE INDEX is running, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view contains one row for each client connection that is currently running a CREATE INDEX command, and the row entry is cleared after the completion of command execution.

Reviewer: for each backend instead of for each client connection to be precise

Reviewer: also i see that this is from the postgresql docs so you can skip this suggestion but - 

instead of "Whenever CREATE INDEX is running, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view contains one row for each client connection that is currently running a CREATE INDEX command, ..." (which refers to a running CREATE INDEX twice)

I think 

"The view contains one row for each backend that is currently running a CREATE INDEX command, and the row entry is cleared after the completion of command execution." 
would be better

Author: Thanks @fizaaluthra . Yes Ill make the changes.

The `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view can provide the following details:

- Number of rows processed during an index backfill.
- The current phase of the command with `initializing` or `backfilling` as the possible phases.
- Index progress report for all the different configurations of an index or index build such as non-concurrent index builds, GIN indexes, partial indexes, and include indexes.

The following table describes the view columns:

| Column | Type | Description |
| :----- | :--- | :---------- |
| pid | integer | Process ID of backend that is running the CREATE INDEX. |
| datid | OID | Object ID of the database to which this backend is connected. |
| datname | name | Name of the database to which this backend is connected. |
| relid | OID | Object ID of the indexed relation.|
| index_relid | OID | Object ID of the index. |

> | command | text | The command that is running CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY, or CREATE INDEX NONCONCURRENTLY. |

Reviewer: nit- code blocks around `CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY` and `CREATE INDEX NONCONCURRENTLY`

| phase | text | The current phase of the command. The possible phases are _initializing_, or _backfilling_. |
| tuples_total | bigint | Number of indexed table tuples already processed. |
| tuples_done | bigint | Estimate of total number of tuples (in the indexed table). This value is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`. |
| partitions_total | bigint | If the ongoing CREATE INDEX is for a partitioned table, this refers to the total number of partitions in the table. Set to 0 otherwise. |
| partitions_done | bigint | If the ongoing CREATE INDEX is for a partitioned table, this refers to the number of partitions the index has been created for. Set to 0 otherwise. |

Columns such as `lockers_total`, `lockers_done`, `current_locker_pid`, `blocks_total`, and `blocks_done` are not applicable to YugabyteDB and always have null values.

## YugabyteDB-specific changes

The `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view includes the following YugabyteDB-specific changes:

- In YugabyteDB, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view is a local view; it only has entries for CREATE INDEX commands issued by local YSQL clients.

> - In PostgreSQL, `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` refer to the tuples of the _index_. However, in YugabyteDB, these fields refer to the tuples of the _indexed table_. This applies only to partial indexes, where the reported progress is less than the actual progress. `tuples_total` is an estimate that is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`.

Reviewer: instead of "This applies only to partial indexes" -> "This discrepancy is only observed for partial indexes" 
("This applies only to partial indexes" would not be accurate because this point applies to all index builds)

> 

Reviewer: Another YB specific change is -
`tuples_done` and `tuples_total` are not displayed (set to null) for temporary indexes.

## Example

The following example demonstrates the possible phases (initializing, backfilling) for the CREATE INDEX operation using the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view.

{{< note title="Setup" >}}

Local single-node cluster. See [Set up YugabyteDB universe](../../../explore/#set-up-yugabytedb-universe).

{{< /note >}}

1. From your local YugabyteDB installation directory, connect to the [YSQL](../../../admin/ysqlsh/) shell, and create an index on an existing table as follows:

    ```sql

>     CREATE TABLE employees (id int, name text, department text);

Reviewer: My bad - the example in the doc wasn't correct.
This should be - `CREATE TABLE customers (id int, customer_name text);`

---
title: View CREATE INDEX status with pg_stat_progress_create_index
linkTitle: View CREATE INDEX status
description: Use pg_stat_progress_create_index to get the CREATE INDEX command status, including the status of an ongoing concurrent index backfill, and the index build's progress reports.
headerTitle: View CREATE INDEX status with pg_stat_progress_create_index
image: /images/section_icons/index/develop.png
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: pg-stat-progress-create-index
    parent: query-tuning
    weight: 450
type: docs
---

> You can add a new index to an existing table using the YSQL [`CREATE INDEX`](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#semantics) statement. YugabyteDB supports [online index backfill](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/master/architecture/design/online-index-backfill.md) and its enabled by default, that is, you can build indexes on non-empty tables online, without failing other concurrent writes. YugabyteDB also supports the [`CREATE INDEX NONCONCURRENTLY`](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#nonconcurrently) statement to disable online index backfill.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add a new index to an existing table using the YSQL [CREATE INDEX](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#semantics) statement. YugabyteDB supports [online index backfill](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/master/architecture/design/online-index-backfill.md), which is enabled by default. Using this feature, you can build indexes on non-empty tables online, without failing other concurrent writes. YugabyteDB also supports the [CREATE INDEX NONCONCURRENTLY](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#nonconcurrently) statement to disable online index backfill.
```

The `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view can provide the following details:

- number of rows processed during an index backfill.
- the current phase of the command with `initializing` or `backfilling` as the possible phases.
- index progress report for all the different configurations of an index or index build such as non-concurrent index builds, GIN indexes, partial indexes, and include indexes.

The following table describes the view columns:

| Column | Type | Description |
| :----- | :--- | :---------- |
| pid | integer | Process ID of backend that is running the CREATE INDEX. |
| datid | OID | Object ID of the database to which this backend is connected. |
| datname | name | Name of the database to which this backend is connected. |
| relid | OID | Object ID of indexed relation.|

> | index_relid | OID | Object ID of index. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| index_relid | OID | Object ID of the index. |
```

| command | text | The command that is running CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY, or CREATE INDEX NONCONCURRENTLY. |
| phase | text | The current phase of the command. The possible phases are _initializing_, or _backfilling_. |
| tuples_total | bigint | Number of indexed table tuples already processed. |
| tuples_done | bigint | Estimate of total number of tuples (in the indexed table). This value is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`. |
| partitions_total | bigint | If the ongoing CREATE INDEX is for a partitioned table, this refers to the total number of partitions in the table. Set to 0 otherwise. |
| partitions_done | bigint | If the ongoing CREATE INDEX is for a partitioned table, this refers to the number of partitions the index has been created for. Set to 0 otherwise. |

> Columns such as `lockers_total`, `lockers_done`, `current_locker_pid`, `blocks_total`, and `blocks_done` are not applicable to YugabyteDB and will have always have null values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Columns such as `lockers_total`, `lockers_done`, `current_locker_pid`, `blocks_total`, and `blocks_done` are not applicable to YugabyteDB and always have null values.
```

## YugabyteDB-specific changes

The `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view includes the following YugabyteDB-specific changes:

- In YugabyteDB, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view is a local view; it only has entries for CREATE INDEX commands issued by local YSQL clients.

> - In PostgreSQL, `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` refer to the tuples of the _index_. However, in YugabyteDB, these fields refer to the tuples of the _indexed table_. This applies only to partial indexes, where the reported progress will be less than the actual progress. `tuples_total` is an estimate that is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In PostgreSQL, `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` refer to the tuples of the _index_. However, in YugabyteDB, these fields refer to the tuples of the _indexed table_. This applies only to partial indexes, where the reported progress is less than the actual progress. `tuples_total` is an estimate that is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`.
```

> - In YugabyteDB, the values for `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` for temporary indexes are not displayed unlike PostgreSQL, because these columns reflect tuples of the indexed table.

Reviewer 2: You lost me. Are you saying they are displayed similarly to PG? howabout:

The values for `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` for temporary indexes are displayed similarly to PostgreSQL, but reflect tuples of the indexed table.

But this seems to duplicate the second bullet really

Author: yes getting rid of this third bullet.

## Example

> The following example demonstrate the possible phases (initializing, backfilling) for the CREATE INDEX operation using the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example demonstrates the possible phases (initializing, backfilling) for the CREATE INDEX operation using the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view.
```

{{< note title="Setup" >}}

Local single-node cluster. See [Set up YugabyteDB universe](../../../explore/#set-up-yugabytedb-universe).

{{< /note >}}

> - From your local YugabyteDB installation directory, connect to the [YSQL](../../../admin/ysqlsh/) shell, and create an index on an existing table as follows:

Reviewer 2: numbered

    78841 | 13291 | yugabyte | 16384 |       16390 | CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY | initializing |               |              |                    |              |             |       100000 |           0 |                0 |               0
    (1 row)
    ```

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM pg_stat_progress_create_index;
    ```

    ```output
    pid   | datid | datname  | relid | index_relid |          command          |    phase    | lockers_total | lockers_done | current_locker_pid | blocks_total | blocks_done | tuples_total | tuples_done | partitions_total | partitions_done
    ------+-------+----------+-------+-------------+---------------------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------------+--------------+-------------+--------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------
    77444 | 13291 | yugabyte | 16404 |       16412 | CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY | backfilling |               |              |                    |              |             |       100000 |       49904 |                0 |               0
    (1 row)
    ```

> ## Learn more

Reviewer 2: Not sure there's much value to xrefs to topics in the same section, they are all in the lefnav anyways

Author: There was a discussion in one of the meetings to include links to other pages in a section. So the effort I guess.

- In YugabyteDB, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view is a local view; it only has entries for CREATE INDEX commands issued by local YSQL clients.

- In PostgreSQL, `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` refer to the tuples of the _index_. However, in YugabyteDB, these fields refer to the tuples of the _indexed table_. This discrepancy is only observed for partial indexes, where the reported progress is less than the actual progress. `tuples_total` is an estimate that is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`.

- In YugabyteDB, `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` are not displayed (set to null) for temporary indexes.

## Example

The following example demonstrates the possible phases (initializing, backfilling) for the CREATE INDEX operation using the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view.

{{< note title="Setup" >}}

Local single-node cluster. See [Set up YugabyteDB universe](../../../explore/#set-up-yugabytedb-universe).

{{< /note >}}

1. From your local YugabyteDB installation directory, connect to the [YSQL](../../../admin/ysqlsh/) shell, and create an index on an existing table as follows:

    ```sql

>     CREATE TABLE customers (id int, customer_name text);

Reviewer: nit: `customers(id int, ...` (remove the space to match the statement below

---
title: View CREATE INDEX status with pg_stat_progress_create_index
linkTitle: View CREATE INDEX status
description: Use pg_stat_progress_create_index to get the CREATE INDEX command status, including the status of an ongoing concurrent index backfill, and the index build's progress reports.
headerTitle: View CREATE INDEX status with pg_stat_progress_create_index
image: /images/section_icons/index/develop.png
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: pg-stat-progress-create-index
    parent: query-tuning
    weight: 450
type: docs
---

> YugabyteDB can build indexes on non-empty tables online, without failing other concurrent writes. When you add a new index to a table that is already populated with data, you can use the YSQL [`CREATE INDEX`](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/#semantics) statement to enable building these indexes in an online manner, without requiring downtime. For details how online backfill of indexes works, see the [Online Index Backfill](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/blob/master/architecture/design/online-index-backfill.md) design document.

Reviewer: The view shows entries for both non-concurrent and concurrent index builds - I think based on this introduction (which only talks about concurrent index builds) that might not be clear?

> YugabyteDB supports the PostgreSQL `pg_stat_progress_create` view to report the progress of the CREATE INDEX command execution. Whenever [CREATE INDEX](../../../api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_create_index/) is running, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view contains one row for each client connection that is currently running a CREATE INDEX command.

Reviewer: Here we can also explicitly add that the entry is cleared upon command completion

The `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view can provide the following details:

- number of rows processed during an index backfill.
- the current phase of the command with `initializing` or `backfilling` as the possible phases.

> - index progress report for all the different configurations of an index or index build such as Nonconcurrent indexes, GIN indexes, Partial indexes, and Include indexes.

Reviewer: "non-concurrent index builds
* since non-concurrent indexes isn't an index type
also nit: lower case non-concurrent, partial and include

| phase | text | The current phase of the command. The possible phases are _initializing_, or _backfilling_. |
| tuples_total | bigint | Number of indexed table tuples already processed. |
| tuples_done | bigint | Estimate of total number of tuples (in the indexed table). This value is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`. |
| partitions_total | bigint | If the ongoing CREATE INDEX is for a partitioned table, this refers to the total number of partitions in the table. Set to 0 otherwise. |
| partitions_done | bigint | If the ongoing CREATE INDEX is for a partitioned table, this refers to the number of partitions the index has been created for. Set to 0 otherwise. |

Columns such as `lockers_total`, `lockers_done`, `current_locker_pid`, `blocks_total`, and `blocks_done` are not applicable to YugabyteDB and will have always have null values.

## YugabyteDB-specific changes

The `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view includes the following YugabyteDB-specific changes:

- In YugabyteDB, the `pg_stat_progress_create_index` view is a local view; it only has entries for CREATE INDEX commands issued by local YSQL clients.

> - In PostgreSQL, `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` refer to the tuples of the _index_. However, in YugabyteDB, because it is currently easier to get indexed table counts (and there's no effortless way to retrieve the index counts), these fields refer to the tuples of the _indexed table_. This discrepancy is only evident for partial indexes, where the reported progress will be less than the actual progress. `tuples_total` is an estimate that is retrieved from `pg_class.reltuples`.

Reviewer: I think some of these details can be left out from the doc - specifically, 

> However, in YugabyteDB, because it is currently easier to get indexed table counts (and there's no effortless way to retrieve the index counts), these fields refer to the tuples of the _indexed table_.

We can specify the difference between PG and YB and leave it at that.

> Additionally, the values for `tuples_done` and `tuples_total` for temporary indexes are not displayed unlike in PostgreSQL, because these columns reflect tuples of the indexed table.

Reviewer: Maybe we can break this bullet point into smaller bullet points? might be easier to read
